---
layout: default
title: Camera Selection
---

# Cameras for KAP

The previous two articles were written to describe what KAP is.  But
this article and those that follow have been developed with a
different goal: to teach you how to get started yourself.  There are
so many ways to do KAP and so many different types of gear that
newcomers might find it difficult to sort out all the options.  So
these next few articles will be about describing those options and
giving advice on which selections are appropriate for different
purposes.

## First, Choose a Camera

Just about any camera can be used for KAP but
the choice of camera will influence most other aspects of the
photographer's KAP experience.  The camera's weight determines what
sort of kites will be needed.  It's size determines the dimensions and
type of rig that's required.  And the method used to trigger the
camera will probably depend on the camera's brand and model.  So when
putting together a KAP system for the first time, it's best to start
by selecting a camera, then choosing the equipment that will work with
it.


Does this mean that you won't be able to use other cameras for KAP
after this first one?  Not necessarily.  Most KAPers find it easy to
upgrade cameras within a particular product line.  And some rigs and
control systems are flexible enough to accommodate different styles of
cameras.  But there is a certain degree of "lock-in" once you start
using a particular camera.


## Key Features

There are certain features that make a camera well-suited
for KAP.  But camera manufacturers don't develop their products with
this use in mind, so choosing a camera generally means accepting some
tradeoffs.  Nonetheless, there are some excellent options available
today and the trend seems to be for cameras to get smaller and cheaper
while producing better images every year.


Let's take a look at the factors that affect the performance of a KAP
system:

## Weight

If we're expecting a kite to lift this camera, it can't weigh
too much.  Fortunately there is an abundance of small point-and-shoot
digital cameras on the market that are ideal.  The lighter a camera
is, the lighter it's rig can be and the smaller the kite that is used
to lift it.  If the idea is to have a system that is easy to carry in
a backpack, you'll want the smallest camera and rig you can find.
(This will probably be paired with a Flowform kite that is also easy
to pack.)


But it's usually not necessary to use the absolute lightest camera on
the market.  Just about any point-and-shoot camera can be fitted to a
KAP rig and lifted by a modest size kite.  That is, a kite that's
small enough for the average person to handle comfortably.


Many photographers would prefer to use an SLR type camera, though, for
their superior image quality and controls.  While this isn't out of
the question, it's not a good way to get started in KAP.  An SLR
camera, even one of the lighter ones, will require more lift to get
airborne.  That means using a bigger kite that's harder to transport
and set up.  It also means working much harder to hold and control the
kite while it's flying.  People who do use SLR cameras for KAP are not
just serious photographers, they're serious kitefliers as well.  I
don't want to discourage anyone with that level of commitment from
doing KAP with an SLR camera, but I still recommend starting with
something smaller and using it to develop the expertise that's so
important with the heavier cameras.


## Digital vs Film Cameras

Digital wins.  Period.  KAP is often a numbers
game.  The more shots you take, the more good ones you get and the
more selective you can be with the results.  Digital cameras can store
hundreds, sometimes thousands of shots before they fill up.  Film
cameras only about 36.


Film cameras do, of course, have some characteristics that could be
advantageous for Kite Aerial Photography.  Medium format cameras, for
example, can capture a scene with far higher resolution than most
digital cameras.  But these cameras are too heavy for most KAP
applications and if any motion blur results from the kite's movements,
this resolution is wasted.  Nonetheless, the master KAP photographer
Nicolas Chorier has used medium format film in his work to stunning
effect.


Film also finds a use in scanning panoramic cameras.  George Lawrence
used such a system in 1906 to photograph San Francisco from the air
after the famous earthquake.  And modern replicas of his 49 pound
camera have been built to commemorate that accomplishment.  But most
of us won't be attempting that sort of KAP.


For the KAP novice I can think of interesting application for film
cameras.  There are published plans for a KAP rig based around a
disposable single-use film camera.  The rig described by these plans
is cheap and simple enough that it makes a great project for the
classroom or a scout troop.  But, while it makes a good project
activity, it won't be as productive as other KAP systems when it comes
to capturing images.


So digital is usually the way to go.  But not every digital camera is
well suited for KAP.  The cheapest digital cameras out there, such as
pen cameras and web cameras, have a flaw that makes them less suitable
for KAP.  They typically employ what's called a rolling shutter.  The
imaging chip captures one line of the image at a time, first the top
line, then the second line and so on down to the bottom of the image.
But if the camera is moving while it's taking the photo, and a KAP
camera usually is, this will result in wild distortion in the final
image.  "Ordinary" digital cameras expose all the pixels at once
before reading out the data, thus avoiding that type of distortion.
So if you're trying to get nice images with KAP, it's best to avoid
web cameras, pen cameras and the like.  On the other hand, if you have
one of these cameras and want to check out the view from a kite, it
should be quite easy to do since they are so small.


## Camera Batteries

Most cameras on the market today use proprietary
rechargeable Lithium Ion batteries.  A few cameras, though, still take
AA batteries.  This gives the user the option to use standard alkaline
batteries, rechargeable NiMH batteries or single-use Lithium cells.
Having these options is good.  If the rechargeable set isn't charged
for some reason, standard alkalines can be used as a backup.  And they
are readily available worldwide.  Lithium cells, though more expensive
than alkalines last much longer and are extremely light.  The weight
savings over other battery types can be significant.


## Image Quality

Lets face it, some cameras take better pictures than
others.  A major factor influencing image quality is sensor size.  SLR
cameras generally have the largest sensors but, as we mentioned above,
they are more difficult to use for KAP.  Point and shoot cameras
aren't all created equally, though, so when choosing a KAP camera,
it's worthwhile comparing sensor sizes of the models under
consideration.  Generally smaller sensors will produce images with
more noise and less overall quality.


One exciting trend in camera design is the new compact format cameras
with SLR-sized sensors.  These are collectivly referred to by the
acronym EVIL, Electronic Viewfinder Interchangeable Lens.  Initially
there was the micro four-thirds system from Panasonic and Olympus.
But other camera manufacturers have started to introduce similar
models such as the Sony NEX-3, Samsung NX and Leica MX lines.  These
should be capable of producing premium quality images without the
unnecessary weight of an SLR.


Another factor influencing image quality is the file format.  Most
point and shoot cameras only produce JPEG files.  These have
relatively little dynamic range and so can't be adjusted and corrected
as readily as RAW files.  Cameras that are capable of producing RAW
files are SLR's and the EVIL's mentioned above.  Also Canon point and
shoot cameras that support CHDK are capable of creating RAW files.
Even when using a camera that supports RAW format, though, there is a
penalty for doing so -- RAW files can be 5 to 10 times larger than the
corresponding JPEG files.

## Triggering Method

Some cameras are more desirable for KAP than others
because of the way they are triggered.  Virtually all cameras come
equipped with a shutter button for triggering the exposure.  Some also
have infrared sensors that work with a wireless remote.  Others have a
port where a wired remote plugs in.  In most cases, these remote ports
are the preferred method of triggering the camera for KAP.  So
choosing a camera that supports an IR remote can lead to a cheaper,
lighter KAP system.


Another method of triggering the camera that's a fairly recent
innovation involves a technology called CHDK. CHDK is a set of
software that runs on certain Canon point and shoot cameras,
temporarily overriding the camera's own software.  It enables the user
to write short programs called scripts are capable of taking photos at
fixed intervals or in response to a 5 volt signal on the USB power
port.  Owners of these cameras have found it's a reliable way to
trigger the camera and it adds no weight or cost to the overall
system.


So no matter what type of camera you have, there's a way to trigger it
on a KAP rig.  But some cameras support methods that are lighter,
cheaper and require less power than others.


## How to Trigger the Camera

Let's shift the topic now from what to look
for in a KAP camera to how the camera is employed in a KAP system.  We
can start by taking a more in-depth look at these triggering
techniques.  For each one we'll discuss when it is applicable and what
are it's advantages and disadvantages.


## A Servo on the Shutter Button

First we consider triggering the camera
by simply pressing the shutter button.  Since every camera has one,
this is a universal approach -- mechanisms that work for one camera
will work for most others as well.  The most common arrangement for
pressing a shutter button is to have a servo motor positioned so that
a little arm comes down and presses the button.  Instead of an arm,
the servo can be fitted with a cam mechanism.  The primary advantages
of this approach: it works where nothing else will.  It can also let
the control system take advantage of some special features found in
most cameras: half-pressing the shutter button to acquire focus and
holding the shutter button to shoot multiple frames.


But there are disadvantages of using a shutter servo, too.  The servo
itself contributes to the weight of the whole system.  And it draws
power from the rig's batteries, shortening the rig's endurance.
Finally, there's the cost.  Most of the alternative mechanisms for
triggering a camera are less expensive, lighter and use less power.


## Infrared Trigger

Now let's consider alternatives to using the shutter
button.  Certain camera models support a remote control that works via
infrared signals.  Now it isn't possible to actually use such a remote
when the camera is on a kite -- the distance is too great.  But some
KAP rigs incorporate a device that can generate the same IR signals,
causing the camera to shoot.  James Gentles has developed an entire
line of products that work on this principle.  There are devices that
convert a servo control signal into IR codes, timers that generate IR
codes at regular intervals and many other useful gadgets.  These
devices are extremely small, light and use very little power.  They
also tend to be less expensive than servos.  What's the downside?
Only certain camera models support IR triggering.  And, unfortunately,
it seems this feature is being dropped from newer camera models even
in product lines that used to support it.


Another type of remote trigger that is sometimes useful for KAP is the
wired remote port.  Typically this feature is found on SLR cameras,
though.  And most of those cameras also support an infrared remote
mechanism.  So it's fairly rare to find a KAP rig that uses this
method of triggering the camera.


CHDK


There is one more important triggering method yet to discuss: CHDK.
CHDK stands for Camera Hacker's Developer Kit.  It's a rather
remarkable and useful innovation but it requires a little explanation.
All digital cameras contain a microprocessor -- a tiny computer that
executes the software that makes the camera work.  CHDK is a set of
alternative software that can be loaded on certain Canon point and
shoot models.  It's like a temporary software upgrade that enables a
host of new features.  But CHDK wasn't developed by Canon, it was
developed by a community of photographers and software engineers via
the internet.  It enables a camera to store images in RAW format.  And
it enables users to write scripts in a language called UBASIC to
control the camera's operations automatically.  (There are dozens of
other features CHDK introduces, as well, but these are the two that
are most important for KAP.)


What that means is we can make the camera take photo automatically.
Here's how it works.  First we prepare an SD card with the CHDK
software and a script file.  The script is a simple UBASIC program
that does takes a picture, waits a few seconds, then repeats
endlessly.  We load this SD card into the camera and turn it on -- the
CHDK software takes control.  We press the [which?] button to bring up
a new CHDK menu.  Using this menu, we select our script file as the
active script.  Now, when we press the shutter button, instead of
taking a picture, the camera starts running the script.  Under the
scripts control, the camera shoots a picture, waits a bit, shoots
again, waits, shoots, and so on.  This continues until we press the
shutter button again, signaling the script to stop.


UBASIC scripts for CHDK can be even more sophisticated, too.  One
useful feature of UBASIC in CHDK is it can sense the state of the
power input on the camera's USB port.  So if want to use an R/C
transmitter to trigger the camera, we can attach the R/C receiver to a
special cable that plugs into the camera's USB port.  Then, when we
toggle the switch on the R/C transmitter, that information is
transmitted to the receiver, is converted to a voltage by the CHDK
cable, is detected by the UBASIC script and the script tells the
camera to shoot a picture.  It's a bit complex but it's reliable.  And
like the IR LED technique, it's lighter, cheaper and more efficient
than using a servo to press the shutter button.


The disadvantages of CHDK: it's only available on certain Canon camera
models and it requires a certain comfort level with computer
technology.  It's not actually necessary to be able write UBASIC
scripts since there are scripts available for KAP already, but the
steps of finding the appropriate version of CHDK for your particular
camera and setting up the SD card can be daunting to some.


## Self Timer and Intervalometer

What options for tripping the shutter
still remain?  Just a few infrequently used ones.  What about the
interval timer that's built into most cameras?  Unfortunately for most
cameras it only waits 10 seconds and takes one shot.  That doesn't
make for a very productive KAP session.  Some models will take
multiple shots which is better but still not convenient enough.  There
are a few cameras on the market that have a built-in intervalometer
feature that allows the camera to shoot photos continuously at regular
intervals.  But even these usually have a minimum period of around 30
seconds.  We want something more like 5 to 10 seconds.


## Re-Wiring the Shutter Button

The final option to describe is opening up
the camera case and attaching wires to the button contacts for the
shutter button.  Using some external electronics, it's possible to
then complete the circuit making the camera react as if the button was
pressed.  This technique is lightweight, cheap and power-efficient
just like the CHDK and infrared methods.  But it involves risking the
integrity of the camera itself and requires quite a bit of skill and
some specialized tools to pull it off.


## Summary

Whew!  That's a lot of options for triggering a KAP camera:
servos, infrared, CHDK, etc.  How will you decide which to choose?  If
you happen to have a camera that supports an infrared remote, the IR
approach is probably your best bet.  If you have a Canon point and
shoot camera that supports CHDK, then try taking advantage of that.
If neither of those options fits your situation, you'll probably want
to use a small servo mounted over the shutter button to trip the shot.
The other options like rewiring the shutter button won't be used by
most readers but they were described here for completeness


## How to Mount the Camera

How to trigger the camera is broad subject,
fortunately, how to mount it is an easier one.  It's virtually
universal that all cameras have a screw socket for connecting a tripod
mount.  The threading of this socket matches a 1/4-20 screw.  So just
about every KAP rig has a 1/4 inch hole through which a short screw or
bolt mates with the camera.


Some people also add a thin rubber pad between the camera and the base
of the rig to which it attaches.  This helps prevent the camera from
twisting if it's bumped.


## Advice to Beginners

Hopefully the material in this article has opened
your eyes to the wide range of options for KAP cameras and how they
are employed.  Now it's time to narrow that scope and help you choose
a camera to get started with.


First, consider using a digital camera you already have.  If you have
any kind of point and shoot camera, it should be straightforward to
build a KAP system around it.  If you use primarily SLR cameras and
want to do KAP with one of those, I would still recommend getting
started with something smaller, then upgrading to the SLR once you've
gained some experience.


If you don't already own a camera you want to use for KAP, you'll want
to purchase one.  Some of the best models for KAP are now discontinued
but can be found on eBay.  The Canon A570IS is a popular one because
it runs CHDK, has great image quality, uses AA batteries and supports
a wide angle adapter.  Try reviewing the reference section for
articles on particular cameras when evaluating other options.


Once you have a camera selected, figure out how you'll trigger it:
servo, IR or CHDK.  IR should be your first choice if the camera
supports it.  Then it should be CHDK if the camera supports that.  If
neither option works out, you'll probably want to use a shutter servo.


The next major decision to be made is what type of control system to
use.  That's the topic of the next article.

[Next: Controls](controls)


