---
layout: default
title: KAP Control Systems
---

# Controls

So, if the camera is way up on a kite line, the question is how to
control it.  We need a way to trigger the shots and maybe even a way
to aim the camera.  For many KAPers, designing and building these
control systems is a fun and rewarding part of the whole KAP
experience.  And the variety of techniques they have invented is
surprising.  But, fortunately it's no longer necessary to custom
design a KAP control system.  There are systems available to get
anyone up and flying for a modest cost.

This article describes some of the more popular approaches to
controlling KAP rigs and includes some advice on which types to use
based on your own goals.  If you're the do-it-yourself type, this
article may spark some ideas you'll want to develop on your own.  For
everyone else, the article also includes descriptions of kits that can
get you flying with minimal fuss.

## Automatic vs Remote Control

KAP control systems tend to fall into one
of two categories: automatic or remote control.  An automatic system
is one where the camera shoots photos at a pre-programmed rate.  It
may have the camera facing a fixed direction or it may change the
camera orientation to cover more subject area.  The photographer's job
with an automatic system is to adjust the rig before launch then get
the rig into position to line up the shot he or she wants.  This
approach tends to produce a high volume of images since the camera is
firing away constantly.  Most of these shots turn out to be redundant
or even useless.  But there are almost always some gems mixed in with
all the junk.  Perhaps it's just inevitable that out of several
hundred images there's bound to be a couple good ones.  Or perhaps
it's because the view from a kite is so interesting that the camera
always finds a nice shot.  Whatever the reason, the automatic
approach, or autoKAP as it's frequently called, has proven to be
surprisingly successful.  And it has grown immensely in popularity in
recent years.

The alternative to automatic controls, of course, is manual control
with some sort of remote control system.  Typically a model airplane
R/C transmitter and receiver are adapted to a KAP rig.  The receiver
end of the radio link mounts on the KAP rig and controls servos to pan
and tilt the camera.  The shutter is controlled via a third channel,
using a servo or one of the other shutter control mechanisms that were
discussed in the previous article.  Some rigs also incorporate a
fourth R/C channel to switch the camera between portrait and landscape
orientations.

The two approaches are quite different in terms of cost and skill
required.  Automatic systems can be very inexpensive and once launched
require no interaction from the photographer.  The photographer's main
job with this sort of system is to put the camera in the necessary
location.  If the photographer has a particular shot in mind, this
means estimating the point of view the camera needs to have then
moving the kite into position.  Once the camera is lined up, though,
it may require some patience since it could take a couple minutes to
guarantee the automatic camera motion has shot the needed orientation.
On the other hand, if the goal is to capture numerous scenes of a
large, scenic area a good strategy is to simply set the KAP rig in
motion and take a stroll through the area of interest.  The rig will
shoot away capturing many interesting features from different angles.

Remote control systems for KAP occupy the medium to high price range
for KAP systems.  But, while more expensive than most automatic
systems, their prices aren't out of reach of most photographers.
These systems demand a little more skill on the photographer's part.
In addition to putting the camera in the right location to get a shot,
the photographer needs to aim and fire each shot.  Pan and tilt
controls are typically mapped to one or two joysticks on an R/C
transmitter unit.  Using these controls, the operator watches the
camera and guesses where it's aiming.  People with experience at this
recommend taking multiple exposures of the intended subject shooting
above, below, left and right of the initial guess.

Keep in mind that while working on aiming the camera, it's still
necessary to pay attention to the kite to keep it flying safely.  The
kite always requires one hand and sometimes both, too, so the R/C
transmitter needs to be set up to operate with one hand and may need
to be laid aside at times.  Some users of R/C equipment have found
ways to modify or repackage the transmitter to make it easier to hold
and operate with one hand.  Still others find that it's best to have
two people working as a team -- one handles the kite and the other
handles the camera controls.

Since aiming the camera properly is key for certain types of KAP
photography, some people have incorporated video feedback systems into
their setups.  This amounts to a tiny video transmitter on the KAP rig
that sends a signal to the ground.  The operator, then has a matching
receiver and some sort of display that shows the view from the camera.
These systems, while providing excellent aiming capabilities, also
bring some drawbacks, though.  For one thing, many types of displays
are difficult to view in field conditions such as full sunlight.  So
the video monitor is usually equipped with some sort of sun shade the
operator can put their face in.  But if too much attention is placed
on the video display, there's a real danger of neglecting the kite or
other hazards in the surrounding environment.  Many who try video
systems have bad experiences with them and give them up.  Others,
though, consider them indispensable.  The ones who find success with
them are more often the same people who KAP in two-person teams.  With
one person managing the video and camera controls, that still leaves
one person with their full attention on the kite and the surroundings.

## Camera Aiming Arrangements

Besides the automatic / remote control
distinction, another way of classifying KAP rigs would be according
the degrees of freedom they offer for orienting the camera.

The "classic" camera control setup is one that allows the camera to
rotate on two axes: pan and tilt.  Panning the camera moves the view
around the horizon.  Tilting moves from the horizon to the nadir, a
point directly below the camera.  With control over these two axes,
the camera can be aimed at any point on the ground.  The pan/tilt
arrangement is the most common setup for remote control rigs, by far.
Some automatic KAP systems also use this arrangement.

Some remote control rigs incorporate a third degree of freedom that
rotates the camera from a portrait orientation to landscape
orientation.  This is useful for composing shots for horizontal or
vertical display.  For this reason, this feature is often referred to
a Ho/Ver (pronounced "Hover") switch or Ho/Ver axis.

As mentioned above, some automatic KAP systems feature the same pan
and tilt controls that remote control ones use.  But automatic KAP
systems with just one or even zero degrees of freedom for aiming are
also popular.  For example, the popular BEAK kit from Brooxes.com is
an automatic control system that moves the camera in the pan direction
but not tilt.  The operator can set the tilt angle to any desired
position before launch but it doesn't change in flight.  If tilted to
shoot the horizon, the camera continuously spins taking pictures in
different directions.  If tilted toward the ground, the rig
photographs a circular area below the camera repeatedly.

Automatic KAP rigs with no motion controls are not uncommon either.
There are rigs where pan and tilt can both be set on the ground before
launch.  Once airborne, these rigs continue to shoot in one direction
indefinitely.  This is useful for situations where the camera angle
relative to the subject and lighting conditions is known.  And there
are rigs that are set up to shoot straight downward repeatedly.  These
offer no variation in shooting angle but they are useful for surveying
the ground in some applications.

## Electronic vs Mechanical Controls

So far all the discussion has been
about electronic control systems.  That's fair since the vast majority
of KAP work is done with electronic controls, but there are other
options.

Mechanical control systems are almost exclusively automatic in nature.
They range from simple to sophisticated in their ingenuity.  On the
simple end of the spectrum are the single-shot systems using rubber
bands or melting ice to trip the shutter just once before requiring a
reset.  On the sophisticated side, there are wind-driven mechanisms
that synchronize shooting the camera with pan and/or tilt motions.
Spring driven systems using a music box mechanism have also been
built.  But all of these mechanical control systems are quite rare
compared to their electronic counterparts.

## Triggering the Camera

[TODO: Consider moving discussion of triggering options to here.]

## Kits and Components

## Advice to Beginners







