---
layout: default
title: Beginner's Guide to KAP
---

# Beginner's Guide to KAP

This is the beginner's guide of HowToKap.com.  Unlike the other parts
of this site, this section is meant to be read sequentially from start
to finish. This page presents an overview of the material found in the
rest of the beginner's guide.

## Introductory Material

The first two categories of the beginner's guide, the Introduction and
"A Typical KAP Session", explain what KAP is and how it works.

The introduction explains what KAP is, provides a brief description of
how it works and then gives some tips on how to get started.  It's
intended to give the reader a basic understanding of what KAP is.

The next section, "A Typical KAP Session", describes the process of
flying a kite and using it to take aerial photos.  This should give
the reader a feeling of what it's like to do KAP.

## Selecting and Using KAP Equipment

After reading the introductory sections, you might be thinking about
giving KAP a try.  So the beginner's guide continue with material on
the wide variety of cameras, control systems, rig designs, kites and
other gear that can be used.

The camera selection guide addresses the types of cameras that can be
used for KAP.  The choice of camera can determine how other elements
of a KAP system will work, so selecting a camera is one of the first
steps to getting started in KAP.

Another major decision for any KAP photographer is what kind of
control system will be used.  Some control systems offer manual
control of the aiming and timing of each shot.  Others shoot photos
automatically at a pre-programmed intervals.  The controls
sectionpresents the most common types of control systems used for KAP
along with some recommendations for beginners.

A KAP rig is the device that holds the camera and attaches to the kite
line.  There are a wide variety of rigs in common use so the KAP Rigs
section describes them and their features.

And of course we need to discuss kites.  Not every kite is suitable
for KAP so the Kites section of the Beginner's Guide explains which
ones are best and why.  It also introduces some of the flying skills
you'll need to do KAP safely.

And finally, the beginner's guide has a section on other gear that's
useful for KAP.  We've already talked about cameras, rigs and kites
but you'll need a few other pieces of equipment as well.  Gloves, kite
lines, reels and anchors are examples of basic gear every KAP
photographer needs.

By this point in the beginner's guide, you might have some ideas about
how to get yourself started doing KAP. There is one more important
topic that needs to be addressed, though: Safety.


## Safety Matters

The safety section is the most important part of the whole site.
Hanging a camera from a kite line presents some obvious hazards.  But
there are some not-so-obvious hazards, too.  This section introduces
the topic of safety and explains how to keep out of trouble.  But this
one section isn't sufficient to address every safety issue.  Safety
will be a theme that runs through many articles throughout the site.

## Getting Started

Finally, we conclude the beginner's guide with some tips on getting
started.  We'll review the decisions you will need to make and steps
you'll need to take before you are taking aerial photos from your own
kite.  This section will also give a little advice on how transition
from newbie to novice to experienced KAP photographer.  So let's get
started!  Just dive on in to the introduction and you're on your way.

[Next](introduction)



