---
layout: default
title: A Typical KAP Session
---

# A Typical KAP Session

The previous article outlined what KAP is and how it works.  Now, we
expand on that by presenting a step-by-step description of a typical
KAP session.  As we've already mentioned there are a wide variety of
techniques used for KAP.  For clarity, though, this article will
present only one approach.  Later articles will describe the full
diversity of KAP technique.

## Preparation

Most KAP sessions begin with at least a little planning.  If I'm
visiting an area I've never flow at before, I like to check it out on
Google Earth.  It's important to make sure there's enough space that's
clear of trees, power lines, roads and buildings.  The subject itself
doesn't have to be in a clear area.  If I can launch in one spot and
then walk to a better one with the kite flying that can work, too.
While studying the map, I like to note the relationship between the
subject and other nearby landmarks.  If I can visualize the angle of
the sun, I can try to imagine what the photos will capture from
different camera positions. And if I have some idea of the wind
direction, I can figure out where I need to stand to put the camera in
the right place.

Speaking of wind, a check of the wind forecast, is in order.  That
give me a hint as to which kite I'm likely to be using.  I have many
kites of different sizes and designs.  Each one works best in a
certain wind range so having several options means I'm more likely
successfully lift the camera.

Before I leave the house, I usually check all my equipment to make
sure I have everything I need.  Arriving at the site without a key
piece of gear is frustrating and sometimes embarrassing.  Having an
equipment checklist isn't a bad idea.  It's also important to make
sure all I have all the batteries I need and that the rechargeable
ones are ready to use.

If the equipment's a go, I'm ready to head out to the field.

## Setting Up

When I arrive at my KAP destination, I first like to walk
around and get my bearings.  Often things aren't quite as I imagined
them on Google Earth.  And the wind doesn't always (ever!) do quite
what the forecast predicted.  Hopefully there aren't any obstacles
that can't be overcome with a little patience, though.

The next step is to prepare the gear near the chosen launch area.  The
KAP rig gets unpacked and assembled, the camera is mounted in it, and
it gets a quick test before I set it aside.  I like to have something
to anchor the kite to, in case I need it, and I use a short loop of
rope with a caribiner on it.  This needs to be attached to something
solid in the launch area before I actually set up the kite.  A few
other pieces of personal gear, like gloves, come out of the bag at
this time, too.

I know that once I launch the kite, I'll have my hands full most of
the time.  This is why I need to make sure everything else is set up
before the kite comes out.

## Kite Launch

Now it's time to get a kite in the air.  But which kite?
From experience, I know what range of wind each of my kites needs.  So
based on how much wind I'm seeing, I'll pick the kite that I think
will work best.  Usually the wind is stronger at higher altitudes than
it is on the ground.  And if the wind forecast was for increasing
winds, I know I'll need to plan to deal with that.  When doing KAP,
it's best to use a kite with just enough lift to carry the rig.  Too
little power and the line will droop until the rig rests back on the
ground.  Too much power, though, can make the kite unstable.  So I
usually start by selecting the smallest kite I think I can get away
with.  I'll fly that first and see how it does.

I put the kite together, attach it to the flying line, put on my
gloves and then launch the kite.  I can't stress enough how important
the gloves are.  The kite will easily cut hands and fingers when it
inevitably slips.  Like most kite fliers I've learned a few tricks
that help get the kite from the ground to the air.  So if the wind is
there, I soon have a kite in the air providing a steady pull on my
line.

It's almost time to hang the camera on the line.  But first I like to
watch the kite for at least five minutes.  Is the wind going to be
steady or will it start and stop?  Will it shift direction?  Is there
going to be turbulence caused by other objects in the area.  It's best
to learn these things before the camera goes up.

## Attaching the Camera Rig

If everything looks good with the kite, it's
finally time to attach the camera rig.  There are two attachment
points between the rig and the kite line.  (This rig uses a suspension
design called a Picavet.)  And in order to make those connections,
I'll need both hands so I first tie off the kite line to the anchor
point I set up earlier.  With the kite tied off, I take the line in
one hand and walk toward the kite, pulling down 10 or 15 feet of line.
At this point I wrap the kite line around the hook that forms the
first attachment point to the rig.  A few feet farther up the kite
line, I wrap the kite line around the second hook.

Now the KAP rig is hanging from the kite line.  It's finally time to
turn on the camera, turn on the rig and watch the automatic control
system start shooting pictures.  Satisfied that the camera and rig are
working, I walk back to the anchor point, still keeping one hand on
the line.  As the line slips through my gloved hand, the kite takes up
the weight of the rig and the camera rises up above my head.

If I've judged the wind right and chosen the right kite, the camera
will be hanging gracefully now, just above head level.  With a slight
sense of relief, I untie the kite line from the anchor and take the
winder into my hand.  I don't like having the kite anchored for any
length of time.  So now I'm flying the kite with my own hand again and
I'm ready to let it take the camera up.

## Raising the Camera

Raising the camera is as simple as letting out more line.  The line
needs to be released smoothly and at a measured pace, though.  If it's
payed out too fast, the line gets too much slack and the camera and
rig will droop.

As the camera goes up, its weight has a noticeable effect on the kite
line.  Instead of making a smooth arc from my hand to the kite, the
line is divided into two segments.  The first rises up to the camera
and the second continues on to the kite at a higher angle.  The weight
of the camera rig has created an elbow in the line.  When the wind
slackens, the camera droops and the angle in the elbow becomes more
pronounced.  It may settle into this lower position for a while until
the wind returns.  When it does, the tension in the line increases,
the elbow straightens and the camera rises back up.

Today it looks like the wind is nice and stable.  The camera is up to
a useful altitude so we're ready to start walking the kite into
position to get the shot.

## Walking Around

Once the kite and camera are flying well together, it's time to think
about composing some nice shots.  This means putting the camera in the
right position.  It's usually quite easy to walk around with the kite
flying.  It's possible to get closer to the subject and walk into
areas where it wouldn't be possible to launch the kite.  But in case
the wind slacks off, its best to have some space upwind to walk into,
just to keep the camera flying.

Walking with the kite can be difficult, though, if the kite is
overpowered or underpowered.  With too much wind, it can be a lot of
work to pull the kite upwind.  Also, walking upwind creates even more
tension on the kite line and can cause a kite that's on the edge to
become unstable and fly toward the ground.  So it can be difficult or
even impossible to move upwind when the kite is overpowered.

When the kite is underpowered, the opposite problem crops up: it's
difficult to walk downwind.  Walking that direction takes wind out of
the kites sail, causing it to lose lift.  If the camera is barely
staying up to begin with, walking downwind can actually cause it to
sag right to the ground.

But with the kite well matched to the wind conditions, it's relatively
easy to move from the launch area to the subject matter and back.

From the time the camera was launched, and the whole time I'm walking
it around, the camera rig is shooting pictures.  It has an automatic
system that triggers the camera about every 5 seconds, changing the
pan and tilt settings between shots.  So, while I don't have any
direct control over what the camera is shooting, I know it will take
pictures of everything in view every few minutes.  So I work the
camera into a position where I think it can see a well-composed scene.
Then I let it sit there for a few minutes before moving on to another
spot.  Other KAP photographers actually use remote controls to aim and
shoot the camera.

## Retrieving the Camera

After a while, I'm satisfied that I have some interesting shots, so I
return to the launch area and start reeling in line to bring the
camera rig down.  This part of the day can be a workout. Retrieving
several hundred feet of kite line can be tiring, especially if the
kite is pulling hard.

Eventually, the camera is back near the ground.  I tie off the kite
line once again and walk down the last few yards of line to reach the
camera rig.  The attachment hooks come off by simply unwinding the
line that was wrapped around them.  With the camera and rig free
again, I set them aside then return my attention to the kite.

## Retrieving the Kite

With the camera off the line now, I haul the kite the rest of the way
back down to Earth.

## Packing Up

After landing the kite, it's time to pack everything up.  It's
critically important to pack the kites and lines carefully.  If they
are put away with the sails neatly folded and lines properly stowed,
they come right out of the bag ready to fly next time.  Otherwise they
twist and tangle into knots that are endlessly frustrating.  It's no
fun starting a new KAP session by spending an hour trying to puzzle
out a birds nest of lines that are supposed to form a kite bridle.
The lines of the Picavet suspension are especially prone to tangling.

## Results

Finally, the field work is over and we can check out the results.
It's rare to have a KAP session that doesn't yield several interesting
shots.  I like to sort out my favorites so I can find them easily in
the future.

Since the KAP rig I use doesn't allow me to compose the shots in
real-time, I like to use panorama stitching software to virtually
compose shots on my computer.  By merging several shots that cover an
interesting subject, I can usually produce the shot I had in mind,
even though the camera never framed it up properly.

The shots I'm particularly proud of, I upload to Flickr, a photo
sharing site.  There is a Kite Aerial Photography group there that
collects KAP photos from people all over the world.  By adding my
shots to the group, I know I'll get a little recognition and possibly
inspire other people to try this themselves.  Getting feedback from
other photographers always motivates me to keep doing this.  It can be
a lot of work, but the unique results are usually worth it.

## Learning More

The remaining sections of the beginner's guide provide information to
help people get started doing KAP.  They present many different
options on what sort of gear and techniques to use and try to help
beginners select the options that best suit their ambitions.  There
are articles on control systems, rigs, kites and other gear.  But the
first key decision a beginner KAP photographer must make is what
camera to use.  So that will be the topic of the next article.

[Next](cameras)