---
layout: default
title: A Guide to Kite Aerial Photography
---

# How to KAP

This site is a guide for those interested in Kite Aerial Photography.
KAP is becoming increasingly popular.  As camera technology becomes
smaller and cheaper and as the Internet makes it easier to share
information, more and more people are discovering KAP.

There is already a wealth of information about KAP available on the
internet.  But if you are new to this field, it can be hard to find
just what you need to get started.  HowToKAP.com is intended to be a
gateway into KAP.  Here, we try to present information in a way that
is easy for beginners to learn.  Newcomers can expect to find basic
information presented in a way that's easy to find and understand.
The site also carries reference material and how-to articles on more
advanced topics as well.  So, whether you just heard of KAP for the
first time or are an experienced KAP photographer, there's something
here for you.

## How to use this site.

The site is organized into several sections, each with it's own
purpose.  The main menu on the left navigates into each of these
sections.  There is also a search feature that can help locate
articles on a particular topic.

## Beginner's Guide

The [Beginner's Guide](/tutorial/) presents a tutorial for newcomers to KAP.  It
explains how KAP works and introduces the basic tools and techniques
for KAP.  The beginner's guide leads the reader step by step through
selecting appropriate equipment and explaining how to use it in an
initial KAP session.  So if you're new to KAP, click on "Beginner's
Guide" in the menu on the left and dive in!

## How-To Articles

The [How-To section](/how-to/) contains standalone tutorials on
individual topics in KAP.  Each one is intended to teach a specific
skill or technique.  Some of these may be useful for beginners but
others may be more advanced.  Unlike the lessons in the beginner's
guide, these are intended to be read in random order.

## Reference Articles

The [Reference section](/reference/), like the How-To section,
consists of articles about individual topics.  Instead of teaching
skills and techniques, however, these articles try to provide factual
information about a particular topic.

If you are new to KAP, you'll probably want to start in the Beginner's
Guide to get familiar with the concepts and terminology of KAP.  Where
the beginner's guide doesn't provide enough detail, or when you want
to learn more advanced material, you should find what you need in the
How-To and Reference sections.

Each of the above sections is further divided into categories.  In
many cases, a category will be repeated in several sections.  For
example, there is a kites category in the Beginner's Guide, the How-To
section and the Reference section.  But these three kite categories
are distinct from one another.  The first one introduces beginner's to
the type of kites used for KAP.  The How-To / Kites category contains
articles on how to build and fly kites.  And the Reference / Kites
category contains articles describing various types of kites, their
characteristics and history.

## Resources and Applications

The [Resource](/resource/) and [Application](application) sections are
an extension of the Reference section.  They seemed important enough
and broad enough to stand on their own.  Within the Resources section
are articles pointing to other web sites and sources of information
and materials.  The Applications section contains articles on
practical uses for KAP.

## Other Important KAP Resources

While there is a whole section of this site devoted to KAP resources,
there are two that deserve mention here on the home page.

## The KAP Forum

![KAP Forum](/image/forum-header.jpg)

The most important KAP resource on the web is the forum established by
Cris Benton.  This is where KAP photographers "hang out" in the
virtual world.  There is a wealth of information and expertise
available there.  It's easy to use the search feature to find past
discussions that answer most questions a newcomer would have.  And the
KAP community is filled with friendly and helpful members who are
always willing to offer some good advice.  Registration is free, so
just sign up and start a new discussion with your own questions.  Much
of the information found on this website was distilled from
conversations hosted on the Forum.

## The KAP Group on Flickr.com

The second primary resource for KAP on the internet is the Flickr KAP
group.  This group hosts thousands of images taken via Kite Aerial
Photography.  There are also related groups with photos and
discussions of KAP rigs, cameras, kites and other things of interest
to the KAP community.  These images of the people, the gear and the
results of KAP really help convey the fun spirit of this unique
enterprise.


