---
layout: post
title: "ESP32 I2C"
date: 2017-1-31
---

# Notes on I2C Programming for ESP32

I'm new to programming the ESP32 and I want to use the I2C
peripheral to interface with the Hillcrest BNO080 sensor hub.

## General Stuff

The ESP32 Technical Reference Manual has hardware architecture and
register level information.

The esp-idf code base doesn't seem to have any i2c driver.  There are
header files that give access to the I2C peripheral registers, though.
These are detailed in "Findings in esp-idf" below.

## Findings in esp-idf

in components/esp32/include/soc/i2c_struct.h, a structure is defined
that maps onto the I2C peripheral.  Two instances of this are
declared, I2C0 and I2C1.  And components/esp32/ld/esp32.peripherals.ld
contains the lines:

~~~
PROVIDE ( I2C0 = 0x3ff53000 );
PROVIDE ( I2C1 = 0x3ff67000 );
~~~

So I think I should be able to access the peripherals from C with statements like:

~~~C
I2C0.int_clr.rx_rec_full = 1;  // clear the interrupt
if (I2C0.status_reg.bus_busy) ...  
~~~

There is also a file components/esp32/include/soc/i2c_reg.h.  It has
defines such as

~~~c
#define I2C_INT_STATUS_REG(i)          (REG_I2C_BASE(i) + 0x002c)
...
/* I2C_BUS_BUSY : RO ;bitpos:[4] ;default: 1'b0 ; */
/*description: 1:I2C bus is busy transferring data. 0:I2C bus is in idle state.*/
#define I2C_BUS_BUSY  (BIT(4))
~~~

So I could also write code like:

~~~c
if (I2C_INT_STATUS_REG(0) & I2C_BUS_BUSY) ...
~~~

Why they provide support for both styles, I don't know.

The _reg.h files are used extensively in the ESP-IDF code base.  The
_struct.h are only used in 6 ESP-IDF source files.

So, yeah, it looks like I have to write register-level code to use the I2C bus.

## Steps for BNO080 driver

### System Initialization
Overall initialization sequence:
* Configure I/O Mux
* Enable I2C peripheral
* Configure I2C peripheral for Master operation
* Enable INTN GPIO pin for interrupt use
* Enable interrupt on INTN

### Writing I2C
* Initiate operation to be processed by interrupts?
* Start generation
* Send address
* Send data
* Stop generation

### Reading I2C
* Initiate operation to be processed by interrupts?
* Start generation
* Send address
* Read data
* Stop generation

### Detecting INTN
* Configure I/O Mux
* TBD

### Controlling GPIO lines
* Configure I/O Mux
* TBD

## Supporting modules

Write drivers to provide higher level access to features:
* I2C master
* GPIO output
* GPIO input with interrupt
* (SPI master)
* (PWM generation for BLDC control)
* (PWM generation for R/C servo)

