---
layout: post
title: "MPCNC : Mostly Printed CNC"
date: 2018-04-16
---

# MPCNC

I discovered the Mostly Printed CNC project today.  And I've been on
the cusp of buying a shapeoko so MPCNC really got my interest.  After
a bit of study, I've decided this is the way I want to go.

[MPCNC Home Page](https://www.v1engineering.com/assembly/)

I figure I can buy the basic parts bundle, 3D print the fittings at
work and buy the rest at Lowes and Home Depot.

| Component       | Source     | Cost  |
| --------------- | ---------- | ----: |
| Parts Bundle    | MPCNC      | 331   |
| 3D Printing     | Work       | -     |
| Makita Spindle  | Home Depot | 99    |
| Galvanized Pipe | Lowes      | ?     |
| Bits            |            |       |
| other?          |            |       |

I figure this going to cost about $500, compared to the Shapeoko that
would be $1500.

## Build Planning

It seems the first step is to find a source of conduit or stainless
steel tube to use.  I found 3/4" EMT conduit in 5 ft lengths at Lowes
and bought one.  I'll try cutting it with a pipe cutter to see how
tricky that is.  I also found some 3/4" Galvanized Pipe in a 6 foot
length that I also bought.  It's much stiffer but will be harder to
cut.  And I'm not sure the outside diameter matches any of the MPCNC
fitting options but I'll check it out.

To make a router with a 12x36" work area, I'd need X axis conduits of
46.4" and Y-axis conduits of 22.4".  That's longer than the 60"
lengths I found.  I could use the full 60 length for a 49.6" working
length.

## Spindle

I figure I'll need a Makita RT0701 regardless of which CNC path I go
down.  I was actually going to buy one tonight at Lowes but they don't
carry that brand.  I could have bought the Dewalt equivalent there but
I think the Makita will be better for working with aluminum.  (It has
lower speeds in its speed range.)  So I'll have to make a trip to Home
Depot for that.

I expect I'll have to buy the proper bits online.  Neither Lowes nor
Home Depot will carry the proper bits for milling aluminum.





